



Network Management Operations                                   O. Havel
Internet-Draft                                                    Huawei
Intended status: Informational                                 B. Claise
Expires: 26 July 2026                                     Everything OPS
                                                           O. G. D. Dios
                                                              Telefonica
                                                                 T. Graf
                                                                Swisscom
                                                         22 January 2026


              SIMAP: Concept, Requirements, and Use Cases
                  draft-ietf-nmop-simap-concept-latest

Abstract

   This document defines the concept of Service & Infrastructure Maps
   (SIMAP) and identifies a set of SIMAP requirements and use cases.
   The SIMAP was previously known as Digital Map.

   The document intends to be used as a reference for the assessment of
   the various topology modules to meet SIMAP requirements.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Network Management
   Operations Working Group mailing list (nmop@ietf.org), which is
   archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/nmop/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ietf-wg-nmop/draft-ietf-nmop-digital-map-concept.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 26 July 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Sample SIMAP Use Cases
     3.1.  Common Enablers for SIMAP
       3.1.1.  Service -> Resource
       3.1.2.  Resource -> Service
       3.1.3.  Traffic Engineering (TE)
       3.1.4.  Closed Loop
     3.2.  Inventory Queries
     3.3.  Service Placement Feasibility Checks
     3.4.  Intent/Service Assurance
     3.5.  Service E2E and Per-link KPIs
     3.6.  Network Capacity Planning
     3.7.  Network Design
     3.8.  Network Simulation and Network Emulation
       3.8.1.  Types of Network Simulation
       3.8.2.  Goals of Network Simulation
     3.9.  Postmortem Replay
     3.10. Network Digital Twin (NDT)
   4.  SIMAP Requirements
     4.1.  Operator Requirements
     4.2.  Design Requirements
     4.3.  Architectural Requirements
   5.  Positioning SIMAP in the Context of the IETF Work
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  IANA Considerations
   8.  References
     8.1.  Normative References
     8.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Related IETF Activities
     A.1.  Network Topology
     A.2.  Topology Abstraction
     A.3.  Core SIMAP Components
     A.4.  Additional SIMAP Components
   Acknowledgments
   Contributors
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   This document defines the concept of Service & Infrastructure Maps
   (SIMAP) and outlines associated requirements and use cases.  It does
   not specify any modeling languages in this document; references to
   existing models and modeling languages are provided for informational
   purposes only.  While the requirements described herein may require
   various modeling strategies, the development of such models is
   outside the scope of this document.

   SIMAP is a data model that provides a topological view of the
   operator's networks and services, including how it is connected to
   other models/data (e.g., inventory, observability sources, and
   operational knowledge).  This model represents a multi-layered
   topology and offers mechanisms to navigate amongst layers and
   correlate between them.  This includes layers from physical topology
   to service topology.  This model is applicable to multiple domains
   (access, core, data center, etc.) and technologies (Optical, IP,
   etc.).

   The SIMAP modelling defines a core set of entities, properties and
   relationships both inside each layer and between the layers that
   ensure a multi-layered topology can be reconstructed, validated and
   queries in an unambiguous and interoperable manner.  Such core set
   consists of:

   *  Core topological entities: The minimal set of objects required to
      represent a layer's topology (e.g., network, node, termination
      point, and link).

   *  Core topological properties: The essential attributes associated
      with these entities to enable topological reasoning (e.g.,
      identify, topology type, entity role, directionality, cardinality,
      and cost/weight).

   The additional concepts or attributes (such as capacity, operational
   state, performance metrics, or inventory data) are modelled outside
   of SIMAP, the core set provides the necessary structure to support
   these extensions without losing architectural consistency.

   The SIMAP modelling also defines how to access other external models
   from a topology.  SIMAP is a topological model that is linked to
   other functional models and connects them all: configuration,
   maintenance, assurance (KPIs, status, health, and symptoms), Traffic-
   Engineering (TE), different behaviors and actions, simulation,
   emulation, mathematical abstractions, AI algorithms, etc.  These
   other models exist outside of the SIMAP and are not defined during
   SIMAP modelling.

   The SIMAP data consists of instances of network and service
   topologies at different layers.  There may be a separate topology
   instance for each layer in a multi-layered network, or a single
   topology instance that encompasses multiple layers.

   Since SIMAP is a data model and data models can generate APIs
   [RFC3444][RFC7950], the SIMAP provides access to this data via
   standard APIs for both read and write access, typically as a
   northbound interface from a controller, with query capabilities and
   links to other data models (e.g., Service Assurance for Intent-based
   Networking (SAIN) [RFC9417], Service Attachment Points (SAPs)
   [RFC9408], Inventory [I-D.ietf-ivy-network-inventory-yang], and
   potentially linking to non-YANG models).

   The SIMAP also provides write operations with the same set of APIs,
   not to change a topology layer on the fly as a northbound interface
   from the controller, but for both online and offline simulations,
   before applying the changes to the network via the normal controller
   operations.

   Both real network, online-simulation and offline simulation APIs can
   be built on the same data model.  Each data source is reported as a
   distinct topology instance, but when desired the real network and
   online simulation data can be merged into a single topology instance,
   while the offline simulation remains separate.  The simulated
   topology instance can be matched directly to the corresponding real
   network topology for comparison.  This approach preserves
   independence between real and simulated data while enabling side by
   side analysis.

2.  Terminology

   This document makes use of the following terms:

   Topology:  Topology refers to the network and service topology.  A
      network topology defines how physical or logical nodes, links and
      termination points are related and arranged.  A Service topology
      defines how service components (e.g., VPN instances, customer
      interfaces, and customer links) between customer sites are
      interrelated and arranged.

      There are several types of topologies: point-to-point, bus, ring,
      star, tree, mesh, hybrid, and daisy chain.

      Topologies may be unidirectional (all links unidirectional) or
      bidirectional (all links bidirectional), or contain combination of
      unidirectional and bidirectional links.

   Multi-layered topology:  A multi-layered topology models
      relationships between different topology layers, where each layer
      represents a connectivity aspect of the network and services that
      needs to be configured, controlled and monitored.  Each topology
      layer has a separate lifecycle.

      [RFC8345] also refers to this multi-layered topology as topology
      hierarchy (stack).  It also uses layers when describing supporting
      relations (represent layered network topologies), underlay/
      overlay, network nodes and layering information.  [RFC8345] states
      that the model can be used for representation of layered network
      topologies.

      [RFC8345] is flexible and can support both the same network
      topology instance with multiple layers (e.g., Layer 2 and Layer 3)
      or separate network topology instances with supporting relations
      between them (e.g., separate Layer 2 and Layer 3).  Therefore,
      multiple topology layers can be grouped into the same network
      topology instance, if solution requires.

   Topology layer:  A topology layer represents Topology at a single
      layer in the multi-layered topology.

      The topology layer can also represent what needs to be managed by
      a specific user or application, for example the IGP layer can be
      of interest to the operator troubleshooting or optimizing the
      routing, while the optical layer may be of interest to the user
      managing the optical network.

      Some topology layers may relate closely to OSI layers, like Layer
      1 topology for physical topology, Layer 2 for link topology and
      Layer 3 for IPv4 and IPv6 topologies.

      Some topology layers represent the control aspects of Layer 3,
      like OSPF, IS-IS, or BGP.

      The service layer represents the Service view of the connectivity,
      that can differ for different types of Services and for different
      providers/solutions.

      The top layer represents the application/flow view of Service
      connectivity.

   Service:  A service represents network connectivity service provided
      over a network that enables devices, systems, or networks to
      communicate and exchange data with each other.  It provides the
      underlying infrastructure and mechanisms necessary for
      establishing, maintaining, and managing connections between
      different endpoints.  The example services are: L2VPN, L3VPN,
      EVPN, VPLS, VPWS,

   Resource:  Defined in [I-D.ietf-nmop-terminology]

   Termination Point:  Defined in [RFC8345], as follows:

      The network-topology module defines a topology graph and
      components from which it is composed: nodes, edges, and
      termination points.  Nodes (from the "ietf-network" module)
      represent graph vertices and links represent graph edges.  Nodes
      also contain termination points that anchor the links.

      A node has a list of termination points that are used to terminate
      links.  An example of a termination point might be a physical or
      logical port or, more generally, an interface.  Like a node, a
      termination point can in turn be supported by an underlying
      termination point, contained in the supporting node of the
      underlay network.

   The document defines the following terms:

   Service & Infrastructure Maps (SIMAP):  SIMAP is a data model that
      provides a topological view of the operator's networks and
      services, including how it is connected to other models/data
      (e.g., inventory, observability sources, and operational
      knowledge).  It specifically provides an approach to model multi-
      layered topology and an appropriate mechanism to navigate amongst
      layers and correlate between them.  This includes layers from
      physical topology to service topology.  This model is applicable
      to multiple domains (access, core, data centers, etc.) and
      technologies (Optical, IP, etc.)

      Therefore, SIMAP defines the core topological entities, their role
      in the network, core topological properties, and relationships
      both inside each layer and between the layers.  It is a basic
      topological model with references/pointers to other models and
      connects them all: configuration, maintenance, assurance (KPIs,
      status, health, symptoms, etc.), traffic engineering, different
      behaviors, simulation, emulation, mathematical abstractions, AI
      algorithms, etc.

   SIMAP modelling:  SIMAP modelling is the set of principles,
      guidelines, and conventions to model the SIMAP.  They cover the
      network types (layers and sublayers), entity types, entity roles
      (network, node, termination point, or link), entity properties,
      relationship types between entities and relationships to other
      entities.

   SIMAP data:  SIMAP data consists of instances of network and Service
      topologies at different layers.  This includes instances of
      networks, nodes, links and termination points, topological
      relationships between nodes, links and termination points inside a
      network, relationships between instances belonging to different
      networks, links to functional data for the instances, including
      configuration, health, symptoms.

      The SIMAP data can be historical, real-time, or future data for
      'what-if' scenarios.

   SIMAP API:  SIMAP API is the set of interfaces that allow the client
      applications to create, read, update, and delete data that
      comforms to the SIMAP.

3.  Sample SIMAP Use Cases

   The following subsections provide a non-exhaustive list of SIMAP use
   cases, with a focus on the related application requirements and its
   interactions with SIMAP, in order to extract the SIMAP-related
   requirements (Section 4).

3.1.  Common Enablers for SIMAP

   This section identifies a set of enablers that are invoked when
   providing the various business-oriented SIMAP use cases.  These
   enablers are grouped here to avoid duplication.

3.1.1.  Service -> Resource

   The SIMAP APIs can be invoked to retrieve all Services for selected
   service types.  An application that triggers such a request will be
   able to retrieve the topology for selected Services via the SIMAP
   APIs and, from the response, it will be able to navigate via the
   supporting relationship top-down to the lower layers.  In doing so,
   the application will be able to determine what logical resources are
   used by a Service.  The supporting relations to the lowest layer will
   help the application to determine what physical resources are used by
   the Service.

3.1.2.  Resource -> Service

   An application can navigate from the physical, Layer 2, or Layer 3
   topology to the Services that rely upon specific resources.  For
   example, the application will be able to select the resources and by
   navigating the supporting relationship bottom-up come to the Service
   and its nodes, termination points and links.

   This APIs can be invoked for Service impact analysis, for example.

3.1.3.  Traffic Engineering (TE)

   Traffic Engineering (TE) [RFC9522] is a network optimization
   technique designed to enhance network performance and resource
   utilization by intelligently controlling the flow of data, for
   example by enabling dynamic path selection based on constraints such
   as bandwidth availability, latency, and link costs.  Its primary
   goals are to prevent network congestion, balance traffic loads, and
   ensure efficient use of bandwidth while meeting performance
   requirements.

   The use cases for capacity planning, simulation, network simulation
   and network emulation, closed loop, and potentially others, should
   consider TE if configured in the network.

3.1.4.  Closed Loop

   A network closed loop refers to an automated and intelligent system
   where network operations are continuously monitored, analyzed, and
   optimized in real time through feedback mechanisms.  This self-
   adjusting cycle ensures that the network dynamically adapts to
   changes, resolves issues proactively, and maintains optimal
   performance without manual intervention.

   Key Characteristics of a network closed loop:

   *  Real-time monitoring: Collects data from network devices, traffic
      flows, and applications to build a comprehensive view of network
      health and performance.

   *  Automated analysis: Identify anomalies, predict potential
      failures, or detect security threats, for example leveraging AI
      and machine learning.

   *  Proactive action: Automatically triggers corrective measures, such
      as reconfiguring devices, isolating compromised endpoints, or
      rerouting traffic.

   *  Continuous optimization: Uses feedback from previous cycles to
      refine network policies and improve future responses.

   The application will be able to retrieve a topology layer and any
   network/node/termination point/link instances from the controller via
   the SIMAP APIs and from the response it will be able to map the
   traffic analysis to the entities (typically links and router) for
   automated analysis.  The corrective measures would be applied, either
   directly to the network by managing the SIMAP entities (network/node/
   termination point/link instances) or by first validating the
   corrective measure in an offline simulation (see the simulation and
   traffic engineering use cases).

3.2.  Inventory Queries

   A network inventory refers to a comprehensive record or database that
   tracks and documents all the network components and devices within an
   organization's IT infrastructure.

   Key elements typically found in a network inventory include:

   *  Hardware details:  Descriptions of physical devices such as
         routers (including their internal components such as cards,
         power supply units, pluggables), switches, servers, network
         cables, including model numbers, serial numbers, and
         manufacturer information.  This information will facilitate
         locating additional details of the hardware in the manufacturer
         systems and the correlation with the purchase catalog of the
         company.

   *  Software and firmware:  Versions of operating systems, network
         management tools, and firmware running on network devices.
         Note that a network device can have components with their own
         software and firmware.

   *  Licensing information:  For any licensed software or devices, the
         network inventory will track license numbers, expiry dates, and
         compliance.

   A network inventory lifecycle refers to the stages a network device
   or component goes through from its introduction to the network until
   its removal or replacement.  It encompasses everything from
   acquisition and deployment to maintenance, upgrade, and eventually
   decommissioning.  Managing the network inventory lifecycle
   efficiently is crucial for maintaining a secure, functional, and
   cost-effective network.

   A well-maintained network inventory helps organizations with network
   management, troubleshooting, asset tracking, security, and ensuring
   compliance with regulations.  It also helps in scaling the network,
   planning upgrades, and responding to issues quickly.  In order to
   facilitate the planning and troubleshooting processes it is necessary
   to be able to navigate from network inventory to network topology and
   Services.

   The application will be able to retrieve physical topology from the
   controller via the SIMAP APIs and from the response it will be able
   to retrieve the physical inventory of individual devices and cables
   and the customer information, if applicable.

   The application may request either one or multiple topology layers
   via the SIMAP APIs and from the response it will be able to retrieve
   both physical and logical inventory.

   For access network providers the ability to have linkage in the SIMAP
   of the complete network (active + passive) is essential as it
   provides many advantages for optimized customer Service, reduced Mean
   Time To Repair (MTTR), and lower operational costs through truck roll
   reduction.  For example, operators may use custom-tags that are
   readily available for a customer-facing device, then query the
   inventory based on that tag to correlate it with the inventory and
   then map it to the network/service topology.  The mapping and
   correlation can then be used for triggering appropriate Service
   checks.

   The IVY working group is a good source of information for inventory
   information.

3.3.  Service Placement Feasibility Checks

   Service placement feasibility checks refer to the process of
   evaluating whether a specific Service can be deployed and operated
   effectively in a given network.  This includes accessing the various
   factors to ensure that the service will function as intended (e.g.,
   based on traffic performance requirements) without causing network
   disruptions or inefficiencies and effecting other Services already
   provisioned on the network.

   Some of the factors that need assesing are network capabilities,
   status, limitations, resource usage and availability.  The Service
   could be simulated during the feasibility checks to identify if there
   are any potential issues.  The load testing could be done to evaluate
   performance under stress.

   The service placement feasibility check application will be able to
   retrieve the topology at any layer from the controller via the SIMAP
   APIs and from the response it will be able to navigate to any other
   data models outside of the core SIMAP topology to retrieve any other
   information needed, such as resource usage, availability, status,
   etc.

3.4.  Intent/Service Assurance

   Network intent and Service assurance work together to ensure that the
   network aligns with business goals and that the Services provided
   meet the agreed-upon Service Level Agreements (SLAs).

   The Service Assurance for Intent-Based Networking Architecture (SAIN)
   [RFC9417] approach emphasizes a comprehensive view of components
   involved in Service delivery, including network devices and
   functions, to effectively monitor and maintain Service health.

   The key objectives of this architecture include:

   *  Holistic service monitoring:  By considering all elements involved
         in Service delivery, the architecture enables a thorough
         assessment of service health.

   *  Correlation of Service degradation:  It assists in linking Service
         performance issues to specific network components, facilitating
         precise identification of faults.

   *  Impact assessment:  The architecture identifies which Services are
         affected by the failure or degradation of particular network
         components, aiding in prioritizing remediation efforts.

   When a Service is degraded, the SAIN architecture will highlight
   where to look in the assurance Service graph, as opposed to going hop
   by hop to troubleshoot the issue.  More precisely, the SAIN
   architecture will associate a list of symptoms originating from
   specific SAIN subservices to each Service instance, corresponding to
   components of the network.  These components are good candidates for
   explaining the source of a Service degradation.

   The application will be able to retrieve a topology layer and any
   network/node/termination point/link instances from the controller via
   the SIMAP APIs and from the response it will be able to determine the
   health of each instance by navigating to the SAIN subservices and its
   symptoms.

3.5.  Service E2E and Per-link KPIs

   The application will be able to retrieve a topology at any layer from
   a controller via the SIMAP APIs and from the response it will be able
   to navigate to and retrieve any KPIs for selected topology entity.

3.6.  Network Capacity Planning

   Network capacity planning refers to the process of analyzing,
   predicting, and ensuring that the network has sufficient capacity
   (e.g., [RFC5136]), resources, and infrastructure to meet current and
   future demands.  It involves evaluating the network's ability to
   handle increasing (including forecasted) amounts of data, traffic,
   and users' activity, while maintaining acceptable levels of
   performance, reliability, and security.

   The capacity planning primary goal is to ensure that a network can
   support business operations, applications, and services without
   interruptions, delays, or degradation in quality.  This requires a
   thorough understanding of the network's current state, as well as
   future requirements and growth projections.

   Key aspects of network capacity planning include:

   *  Traffic analysis: Monitoring and analyzing network traffic
      patterns to identify trends, peak usage periods, and areas of
      congestion.  For example, by generating a core traffic matrix with
      IPFIX flow record [RFC7011] or deducting an approximate traffic
      matrix from the link utilization data.

   *  Resource utilization: Evaluating the link utilization throughout
      the network for the current demand to identify bottlenecks and
      potential QoS performance issues.

   *  Growth forecasting: Predicting future network growth based on
      business expansion, new applications, or changes in users'
      behavior.

   *  What-if scenarios: Creating models to assess the network behavior
      under different scenarios, such as increased traffic, failure
      conditions (link, router or Shared Risk Resource Group), and new
      application deployments (such as a new Content Delivery Network
      source, a new peering point, a new data center...).

   *  Upgrade planning: Identifying areas where upgrades or additions
      are needed to ensure that the network can minimize the effect of
      node/link failures, mitigate QoS problems, or simply to support
      growing demands.

   *  Cost-benefit analysis: Evaluating the costs and benefits of
      upgrading or adding new resources to determine the most cost-
      effective solutions.

   By implementing a robust capacity planning process, organizations
   can:

   *  Ensure better network reliability: Minimize downtime and ensure
      that the network is always available when needed.

   *  Improve performance: Optimize network resources to support
      business-critical applications and Services.

   *  Optimize costs: Avoid unnecessary over-provisioning by making
      informed decisions based on data-driven insights.

   *  Support business growth: Scale the network to meet increasing
      demands and support business expansion.

   The application will be able to retrieve a topology layer and any
   network/node/termination point/link instances from the controller via
   the SIMAP APIs and from the response it will be able to map the
   traffic analysis to the entities (typically links and router),
   evaluate their current utilization, evaluate which elements to add to
   the network based on the growth forecasting, and finally perform the
   'what-if' failure analysis by simulating the removal of link(s) and/
   or router(s) while evaluating the network performance.

3.7.  Network Design

   Network design involves defining both the logical structure, such as
   access, aggregation, and core layers, and the physical layout,
   including devices and links.

   It serves as a blueprint, detailing how these elements interconnect
   to deliver the intended network behavior and functionality.  The
   application will retrieve a candidate network topology as the initial
   design, which can then undergo further analysis (e.g., perform
   traffic flow simulations to identify bottlenecks and redundancy
   checks to ensure resilience) before being transformed into actionable
   intent and, eventually, deployment actions.

   Throughout the network's lifecycle, the design rules embedded within
   a topology can be continuously validated.  For example, a link rule
   might specify that a connection between core and aggregation layers
   must have its source(s) and destination(s) located within the same
   data center.  Another example is to declare that a specific link type
   should only exist between Core <-> Aggregation layer with certain
   constraints on port optic speed, type (LR vs SR for instance), etc.

   The application can (via SIMAP API):

   *  Write the proposed network interconnect (topology + rules), this
      is a new potential network interconnect.  One network (in case of
      small network) or interconnect of multiple networks (bigger
      networks).

   *  Write the intended network interconnect (topology + rules), this
      is the intent of the network topology that cannot be retrieved
      from the real network (e.g. our L2 topology interconnect intent,
      or L3 topology interconnect intent).  One network (in case of
      small network) or interconnect of multiple networks (bigger
      networks).

   *  Retrieve the proposed network interconnect (topology + rules)

      -  Use case can be for purpose of traffic simulation, testing
         behavior under failures.  Network simulation use case is
         described in Section 3.8.

      -  Use case can be for purpose of comparing different proposed
         network interconnects.

      -  Use case can be to build a simulated environment using this
         design.  Network simulation use case is described in
         Section 3.8.

   *  Retrieve the intended network interconnect (topology + rules)

   *  At any point in time, compare the discovered topology with
      intended one

      -  Potentially validating discovered device configurations with
         intended ones assuming SIMAP has the external reference to
         configuration from topology.

3.8.  Network Simulation and Network Emulation

   Network simulation is a process used to analyse the behaviour of
   networks via software.  It allows network engineers and researchers
   to assess how the network protocols work under different conditions,
   such as different topologies, traffic loads, network failures, or the
   introduction of new devices.  Network emulation, on the other hand,
   replicates the behavior of a real-world network, allowing for more
   realistic analysis compared to network simulation.  While network
   simulation focuses on modeling and approximating network behavior,
   network emulation involves creating a real-time, functional network
   environment whose protocols behave exactly like a real network.
   Ideally, network emulation uses the same software images as the real
   network, but it could also be performed (with less accuracy) using
   generic software.

3.8.1.  Types of Network Simulation

   There are several types of network simulations, each designed to
   address specific needs and use cases.  Below are the main categories
   of network simulation:

   1.  Discrete event simulation:  This is the most common type of
          network simulation.  It models a series of events that occur
          at specific points in time.  Each event triggers a change in
          the state of a network component (e.g., a link is down, a card
          fails, or a packet arrives).

   2.  Continuous simulation:  In contrast to discrete event simulation,
          continuous simulation models systems where variables change
          continuously over time.  Network parameters like bandwidth,
          congestion, and throughput can be treated as continuous
          functions.

          The main use case is to model certain aspects of network
          performance that evolve continuously, such as link speeds or
          delay distributions in links that are impacted by
          environmental conditions (such as microwave or satellite
          links).

   3.  Monte Carlo simulation:  This type of simulation uses statistical
          methods to model and analyze networks under uncertain or
          variable conditions.  Monte Carlo simulations generate a large
          number of random samples to predict the performance of a
          network across multiple scenarios.  It is used for
          probabilistic analysis, risk assessment, and performance
          evaluation under uncertain conditions.

3.8.2.  Goals of Network Simulation

   The simulations can be also classified depending on the goal of the
   simulation.

3.8.2.1.  Network Protocol Analysis

   This type of simulation focuses on simulating specific networking
   protocols (IS-IS, OSPF, BGP, SR) to understand how they perform under
   different conditions.  It models the protocol operations and
   interactions among devices in the network.  For example, simulation
   can be used to assess the impact of changing a link metric.
   Moreover, specific features of the networking protocol can be tested.
   For example, how fast-reroute performs in a given network topology.

3.8.2.2.  Traffic Simulation

   This simulation focuses on modelling traffic flow across the network,
   including packet generation, flow control, routing, and congestion.
   It aims to evaluate traffic's impact on network performance.

   The main use is to model the impact of different types of traffic
   (e.g., voice, video, mobile data, web browsing) and understand how
   they affect the network's bandwidth and congestion levels.  It can be
   used to identify bottlenecks and assist the capacity planning
   process.

3.8.2.3.  Simulation of Different Topologies Under Normal and Failure
          Scenarios

   This type of simulation focuses on the structure and layout of the
   network itself.  It simulates different network topologies and their
   impact on the network's performance.  It can be used, together with
   the traffic simulation, to evaluate the most efficient topology for a
   network under normal conditions and considering factors like fault
   tolerance.

3.9.  Postmortem Replay

   For the postmortem replay use case, the application will use the
   SIMAP APIs for the purpose of analysis of network Service property
   evolution based on recorded changes.  A collection of relevant
   timestamped network events, such as routing updates, configuration
   changes, link status modifications, traffic metrics evolution, and
   Service characteristics, is being made accessible from and/or within
   a SIMAP to support investigation and automated processing.  Using a
   structured format, the stored data can be replayed in sequence,
   allowing network operators to examine historical network behavior,
   diagnose issues, and assess the impact of such events on Service
   assurance.

   The mechanism supports correlation with external data sources to
   facilitate comprehensive post-mortem analysis.  Beyond centralizing
   and correlating such various sources of information, the SIMAP can
   provide simulation of the network behaviour to assist investigations.

   In essence, this use case builds upon a collection of other SIMAP use
   cases, such as inventory queries, intent/service assurance, Service
   KPIs, capacity planning, and simulation, to provide a thorough
   understanding of a network event impacting Service assurance.

   Note that this use case may serve as a component of Service
   Disruption Detection fine tuning as described in
   [I-D.ietf-nmop-network-anomaly-architecture].

3.10.  Network Digital Twin (NDT)

   Per [I-D.irtf-nmrg-network-digital-twin-arch], Network Digital Twin
   (NDT) is a digital representation that is used in the context of
   Networking and whose physical counterpart is a data network (e.g.,
   provider network or enterprise network).  Also, as discussed in
   Section 9.2 of [I-D.irtf-nmrg-network-digital-twin-arch], network
   element models and topology models help generate a virtual twin of
   the network according to the network element configuration, operation
   data, network topology relationship, link state and other network
   information.  The operation status can be monitored and displayed,
   the network configuration change and optimization strategy can be
   pre-verified and historical data can support e.g. postmorem replay
   (Section 3.9))

   Section 9.4 of [I-D.irtf-nmrg-network-digital-twin-arch] further
   elaborates on the requirements on various interfaces:

   *  Network-facing interfaces are twin interfaces between the real
      network and its twin entity.  They are responsible for the
      information exchange between a real network and NDT.  SIMAP APIs
      can be used within such interfaces.

   *  Application-facing interfaces are between the NDT and
      applications.  They are responsible for the information exchange
      between Network Digital Twin and network applications.  SIMAP APIs
      can be used for specification of hypothetical network and service
      states for 'what-if' analysis, e.g.. for feasibility checks
      (Section 3.3), simulation or emulation (Section 3.8)).  Such
      analysis may be used in support of e.g. network capacity planning
      (Section 3.6)) or network design (Section 3.7)).

   Section 9.4 of [I-D.irtf-nmrg-network-digital-twin-arch] recommends
   that these interfaces are open and standardized so as to avoid either
   hardware or software vendor lock and achieve interoperability.

   While network emulation (Section 3.8) can be a component within an
   NDT, the NDT itself is a broader construct that integrates multiple
   modeling techniques, including emulation, simulation, and analytics,
   to support intelligent network operations.  NDT uses network
   emulation and includes network emulation use case, but it also
   interacts with the real network to support intelligent operations,
   including predictive analytics, intent verification, and full
   lifecycle management of network and services.

4.  SIMAP Requirements

   The SIMAP requirements are split into three groups for different
   target audiences:

   *  Operator requirements:  These requirements are collected from the
         operators.  They are functional requirements derived from the
         operators' use cases.  Some of the more specific semantic
         requirements were identified as [RFC8345] gaps during the
         Hackathons with operators and added as specific semantic
         requirements to the operator use cases.

   *  Design requirements:  These requirements are derived from the
         operators' requirements.  Although there is some duplication,
         these are focused on summarizing the operators' requirements
         for the design of the data model and API.  These are functional
         requirements translated into low-level requirements for the
         model designers.  The rationale for adopting this approach is
         to ensure that the data model is designed according to the
         operators' requirements and that they could be used for both
         design and review of the candidate data models.

   *  Architecture requirements:  Architectural (non-functional)
         requirements are captured as well, as operators identified
         performance needs, large scale support, and network discovery.
         These are not data model requirements, but are requirements
         either to drive the APIs design itself (e.g., to better
         optimize performance) or for the network controllers and
         orchestrators that expose a SIMAP API.  Although, they may be
         common sense requirements not specific to SIMAP API, they are
         listed here for completeness.

4.1.  Operator Requirements

   The following are the operators' requirements for the SIMAP.  Note
   that some of these requirements are supported by default by
   [RFC8345].

   REQ-BASIC-MODEL-SUPPORT:  Basic model with network, node, link, and
      termination point entity types.

      This means that users of SIMAP must be able to understand a
      topology model at any layer via these core concepts only, without
      having to go to the details of the specific augmentations to
      understand the topology.

   REQ-LAYERED-MODEL:  Topology layers from physical layer up to Service
      layer.

      SIMAP must provide views for all layers of network topology, from
      physical network (ideally optical), Layer 2, Layer 3 up to Service
      and intent views.  It must provide flexibility to support both the
      same network topology instance with multiple layers (e.g., Layer 2
      and Layer 3) or separate network topology instances with
      supporting relations between them (e.g., separate Layer 2 and
      Layer 3).  Multiple topology layers can be grouped into the same
      network topology instance, if solution requires.

   REQ-VIEWPOINTS:  SIMAP should provide different views to different
      applications.  For example, one application may need to see Layer
      2 and Layer 3 layers in a single network topology instance, while
      another application may need to see them as separate network
      topology instances.

   REQ-PASSIVE-TOPO:  SIMAP must support capability to model topology of
      the complete network.  If the implementation requires passive
      topology to be part of the complete multi-layered topology, then
      SIMAP must support the capability to model the passive part of the
      network (in addition to the active part).

      For access network providers the ability to have linkage in the
      SIMAP of the complete network (active + passive) is essential as
      it provides many advantages for optimized customer Service,
      reduced MTTR, and lower operational costs through truck roll
      reduction.

      The passive topology must be either implemented in the SIMAP (what
      cannot be discovered can be added using the write API) or
      accessible from the SIMAP.  Whether the passive topology is
      included as part of the SIMAP or accessible from the SIMAP is left
      to the solutions.

   REQ-PROG-OPEN-MODEL:  Open and programmable SIMAP.

      This includes "read" operations to retrieve the view of the
      network, typically as application-facing interface of Software
      Defined Networking (SDN) controllers or orchestrators.

      It also includes "write" operations, not for the ability to
      directly change the live SIMAP data (e.g., changing the network or
      Service parameters), but for offline simulations, also known as
      what-if scenarios.

      Running a "what-if" analysis requires the ability to take
      snapshots and to switch easily between them.

      Note that there is a need to distinguish between a change on the
      SIMAP for future simulation and a change that reflects the current
      reality of the network.

   REQ-STD-API-BASED:  Standard-based SIMAP and APIs, for multi-vendor
      support.

      SIMAP must provide the standard APIs that provide for read/write
      and queries.  These APIs must also provide the capability to
      retrieve the links to external data/models.

   REQ-COMMON-API:  SIMAP and common APIs, for multi-domain.

      SIMAP and its APIs must be common over different network domains
      (campus, core, data center, etc.).

      This means that clients of the SIMAP APIs must be able to
      understand the topology model of layers of any domain without
      having to understand the details of any technologies and domains.

   REQ-GRAPH-TRAVERSAL:  Topology graph traversal.

      SIMAP must be optimized for graph traversal for paths and for
      graph traversal for the specific use case queries.  This means
      that only providing link nodes and source and sink relationships
      to termination-points may not be sufficient, we may need to have
      the direct relationship between the termination points or nodes.

   REQ-TOPOLOGY-ABSTRACTION:  Navigation across the abstraction levels.

      A network (even a single layer network) can be represented in
      multiple ways providing different abstraction views of the same
      network.  In such a case, it would be beneficial being able to
      navigate amongst the different levels of abstractions (e.g. to
      understand which set of nodes in the native topology are actually
      represented as a single node in an abstract topology being built
      on top of the native topology).  This navigation is different and
      orthogonal to the multi-layer navigation where we need to report
      which Layer 2 path is supporting a given Layer 3 node or link.
      Nevertheless, it would not be the best practice to expose it via
      different topology APIs and model.  Please refer to the
      Appendix A.2 for some background on the topology abstraction.

      SIMAP must provide a mechanism to navigate across the abstraction
      levels.

   REQ-LIVE:  Live network topology.

      SIMAP must enable retrieval of multi-layered topology of a live
      network.

      Live network is the latest known view of the network

   REQ-SNAPSHOT:  Network snapshot topology.

      SIMAP must enable retrieval of multi-layered topology of different
      snapshots

      Snapshot is the view of the network at any given point in time

   REQ-POTENTIAL:  Potential new network topology.

      SIMAP must enable both retrieval and write access to the potential
      new network.

      A potential network topology is a state generated by a simulation
      (online or offline) at a given point of time that includes any
      modifications from the snapshot and can be queried and modified
      for what-if planning.

      This view may contain either the full topology or just differences
      from the snapshot.

   REQ-INTENDED:  Intended network topology.

      SIMAP must enable both retrieval and write access to the intended
      network topology that cannot be discovered from the real network
      (e.g., intended Layer 2 Topology, intended Layer 3 Topology, and
      passive topology that cannot be discovered).

   REQ-SEMANTIC:  Network topology semantics.

      SIMAP must provide semantics for layered network topologies and
      for linking external models/data.

   The following requirements are more specific requirements for
   semantics:

   REQ-LAYER-NAVIGATE:  SIMAP must provide capability to navigate inside
      the topology layer and between the topology layers.

   REQ-EXTENSIBLE:  SIMAP must be extensible with metadata.  As
      examples, a controller or the application could add a custom
      “location” attribute to a node to record its physical site, or a
      controller could attach a “vendorId” field to a device node.  This
      demonstrates that arbitrary key-value metadata can be appended to
      any element in the model without altering the core schema.

   REQ-PLUGG:  SIMAP must be pluggable.  That is,

      *  Must connect to other data models for device configuration,
         inventory, configuration, assurance, etc.  The SIMAP does not
         contain the detailed device configuration, so a mechanism is
         needed to be able to link it from SIMAP.  SIMAP should also be
         linked to a 'logical configuration inventory'.  Several
         examples of the type of logical information to be linked from
         SIMAP: inventory of logical interfaces, inventory of ACLs, or
         inventory of routing policies.

      *  Given that not all involved components can be available using
         YANG, there is a need to connect SIMAP with other modelling
         mechanisms.

   REQ-BIDIR:  SIMAP must provide a mechanism to model bidirectional
      links when the implementation requires bidirectional links.  While
      data flows are unidirectional, the bidirectional links are also
      common in networking.  Examples are Ethernet cables, bidirectional
      SONET rings, socket connection to the server, etc.  There is also
      the requirement for simplified Service layer topology, where a
      link is modeled as bidirectional in order to be supported by
      unidirectional links at the lower layer.

   REQ-MULTI-POINT:  SIMAP must provide a mechanism to model multipoint
      links.  A topology model should be able to model any topology type
      in a simple and explicit way, including point to multipoint, bus,
      ring, star, tree, mesh, hybrid and daisy chain.  A topology model
      should also be able to model any link cardinality in a simple and
      explicit way, including point-to-point, point-to-multipoint,
      multipoint-to-multipoint or hybrid.

   REQ-MULTI-DOMAIN:  SIMAP must provide a mechanism to model links
      between networks when the implementation requires multi-domain
      topologies, topologies with multiple IGP areas or any network
      partitioning.  This requirement is about covering connectivity
      between different networks, sub-networks, or domains.

   REQ-SUBNETWORK:  SIMAP must provide a mechanism to model network
      decomposition into sub-networks.  The requirement is about
      modelling hierarchical networks , Autonomous Systems (ASes) with
      multiple areas, or a network with multiple domains (e.g., access,
      core, data center).

      The network can be partitioned by providing capability to have
      multiple child network instances as part of a single parent
      network, with a relation between the parent network and child
      networks.

   REQ-SHARED:  SIMAP must provide a mechanism to share nodes, links,
      and termination points between different networks.

   REQ-SUPPORTING:  SIMAP must provide a mechanism to model supporting
      relationships between different types of topological entities
      (e.g., a termination point is supported by the node).  This may be
      required, e.g., if a termination point is not supported by the
      underlying a termination point, but by the node (e.g., a loopback
      does not have physical representation, so it is supported by
      physical device).

   REQ-STATUS:  Links and nodes that are down must appear in the
      topology.  The status of the nodes and links must be either
      implemented in the SIMAP or accessible from the SIMAP.  Whether
      the status is included as part of the SIMAP or accessible from the
      SIMAP is left to the solutions.

   REQ-DATA-PLANE-FLOW:  Provider data plane (Flow) needs to be
      correlatable to underlay and customer data plane to overlay
      topology

      An SRv6 example:

      In an SRv6-enabled network, the sourceIPv6Address field appears
      twice in the IPFIX data-template/data-record for a captured flow
      on an SRv6-enabled provider interface.  Once in relation to
      provider data plane in the underlay, and once as relation to the
      customer data plane in the overlay.

      SIMAP must provide the semantic capability that each
      sourceIPv6Address can be mapped to the overlay and underlay
      network topology.  Both topologies might not be uniquely
      addressed, the VPN context (in SRv6 these are the SID's, Section 3
      of [RFC8986]) needs to be considered therefore as well.

      IPFIX protocol, defined in [RFC7011], is the protocol for the
      exchange of flow information from an Exporting Process to a
      Collecting Process.  Section 8 of [RFC7011] describes the
      management of Templates and Option templates at the Exporting and
      Collecting Processes, and states the following:

   |  If an Information Element is required more than once in a
   |  Template, the different occurrences of this Information Element
   |  SHOULD follow the logical order of their treatments by the
   |  Metering Process.  For example, if a selected packet goes through
   |  two hash functions, and if the two hash values are sent within a
   |  single Template, the first occurrence of the hash value should
   |  belong to the first hash function in the Metering Process.  For
   |  example, when exporting the two source IP addresses of an IPv4-in-
   |  IPv4 packet, the first sourceIPv4Address Information Element
   |  occurrence should be the IPv4 address of the outer header, while
   |  the second occurrence should be the address of the inner header.
   |  Collecting Processes MUST properly handle Templates with multiple
   |  identical Information Elements.

   REQ-CONTROL-PLANE:  Control-plane routing state must be correlatable
      to the corresponding data-plane topology.  For example, the
      underlay control-plane routing state must correlate to the
      underlay L3 topology, while the overlay control-plane routing
      state must correlate to the overlay L3 network topology.

      A BMP/BGP example:

      The BMP peer distinguisher (Section 4.2 of [RFC7854]) needs to be
      correlateable to the VRF of a node and the next-hop attribute of
      the NLRI in the BMP route-monitoring (Section 4.6 of [RFC7854])
      encapsulated message to the underlay network topology while the
      path attribute of the NLRI in the BMP route-monitoring
      encapsulated message to the overlay topology.

4.2.  Design Requirements

   The following are the design requirements for the SIMAP data model:

   REQ-TOPO-ONLY:  SIMAP should contain only topological information.

      SIMAP is not required to contain all models and data required for
      all the management and use cases.  However, it should be designed
      to support adequate pointers to other functional data and models
      to ease navigating in the overall system.  For example:

      *  ACLs and Route Policies are not required to be supported in the
         SIMAP, they would be linked to the SIMAP.

      *  Dynamic paths may, depending on the solution, be either inside
         or outside of the SIMAP.  If outside of SIMAP, dynamic paths
         could be linked to the SIMAP.

      SIMAP should ensure that it is possible to represent the paths/
      routes and leave the choice of what level of dynamics to represent
      to the specific solution/application.  The model needs to be rich
      enough to represent any level of dynamics.  However, from
      experience, we suspect it can be the same model for all level of
      dynamics.

   REQ-PROPERTIES:  SIMAP entities should mainly contain properties used
      to identify topological entities at different layers, identify
      their roles, and topological relationships between them.

      SIMAP entities should also provide information required to define
      semantics for layered network topologies, such as:

   *  link directionality,

   *  whether the links are multipoint or not and, if so, are whether
      these links are point-to-multipoint or multipoint-to-multipoint,

   *  role of the termination points in the link (source, destination,
      hub, spoke), and

   *  some generic mechanism to add metadata.

   REQ-RELATIONSHIPS:  SIMAP should contain all topological
      relationships inside each layer or between the layers (underlay/
      overlay)

      SIMAP should contain links to other models/data to enable generic
      navigation to other data models in generic way.

      The SIMAP relationships should also provide information required
      to define semantics for layered network topologies, such as
      providing:

   *  underlay and overlay relations between different types of
      topological entities,

   *  additional information that helps with navigation inside a layer
      and between the layers, for example, easy identification of
      resources at the physical layer in primary versus backup paths, if
      the underlay resources are used for load balancing or for backup,

   *  capability to model nodes, termination points, and links contained
      in a network, but also nodes and links shared between networks,
      and

   *  relationships between networks, either for modelling of underlay
      and overlay or modelling network that contains multiple networks.

   REQ-CONDITIONAL:  Provide capability for conditional retrieval of
      parts of SIMAP.

   REQ-TEMPO-HISTO:  Must support geo-spatial, temporal, and historical
      data.  The temporal and historical can also be supported external
      to the SIMAP.

4.3.  Architectural Requirements

   The following are the architectural requirements for the controller
   implementations that provide SIMAP API, they are the non-functional
   requirements for the SIMAP APIs and controller implementations:

   REQ-SCALES:  The SIMAP APIs and controller implementations must be
      scalable, it must support any provider network, independent of its
      size.

   REQ-PERFORMANCE:  The SIMAP APIs and controller implementations must
      be performant, and have acceptable response-time.  Although we are
      not to define the response time here.

   REQ-USABILITY:  The SIMAP APIs must be simple and easy to integrate
      with the client applications, whose developers may not be
      networking experts.

   REQ-DISCOVERY:  A network controller must perform the initial and on-
      demand discovery of a network in order to provide the layered
      topology via the SIMAP APIs to a client/application.

   REQ-SYNCH:  The controller must perform the sync with the network in
      order to provide up to date layered topology via SIMAP APIs to the
      client/application

   REQ-SECURITY:  The conventional NACM control access rules [RFC8341]
      should apply.  This includes module control access rules, protocol
      operation control access rules, data node control access rules,
      and notification control access rules.

5.  Positioning SIMAP in the Context of the IETF Work

   [RFC8199] advocates for a consistent classification of YANG modules
   and introduces two abstraction layers for YANG modules:

   *  network element YANG modules

   *  network service YANG modules

   The IRTF [RFC7426] defines the SDN layers and architecture and
   proposes the following interfaces:

   *  southbound interfaces between the network devices and controllers/
      managers

   *  service interface between controllers/managers and applications

   [RFC8309] defines where service model might fit into the SDN
   Architecture, although the service model does not require or preclude
   the use of SDN.  It shows the following models at different layers of
   abstraction:

   *  device model, between network elements and controllers

   *  network model, between controllers and network orchestrators

   *  service model, between network orchestrators and service
      orchestrators

   *  customer service model, between service orchestrators and customer

   [RFC8453] describes the ACTN architecture in the context of the YANG
   service models.  It shows how ACTN interfaces relate to device model,
   network model and customer service model.

   [RFC8969] describes a framework for Service and network management
   automation that takes advantage of YANG modelling technologies.  This
   framework is drawn from a network operator perspective irrespective
   of the origin of a data model.  [RFC8969] introduces "network service
   models" and describes the layering and representation of models
   within a network operator as follows:

   *  device model, between device and controller

   *  network model (operator oriented), between controller (that
      includes network orchestration function) and service orchestrator

   *  service model (customer oriented), between service orchestrator
      and customer, this is network service model

   The SIMAP can be used at different layers of abstraction and SIMAP
   can provide topology at different interfaces.  Although the SIMAP and
   APIs is primarily positioned as northbound multi-layered topology
   model from (SDN) Controllers, it can also be positioned as follows:

   *  In the context of [RFC8199], SIMAP can provide multi-layered
      topology YANG module as part of both network element and network
      service YANG modules

   *  In the context of [RFC7426], SIMAP can provide multi-layered
      topology interface as part of both Southbound and Service
      Interfaces

   *  In the context of [RFC8309], SIMAP can provide multi-layered
      topology model as part of device model, network model, service
      model and customer service model

   *  In the context of [RFC8453], SIMAP can provide multi-layered
      topology model as part of SBI (southbound interface to network),
      MPI (interface between multi-domain service coordinator and
      network controller) and CMI (interface between customer network
      controller and multi-domain service controller)

   *  In the context of [RFC8969], SIMAP can provide multi-layered
      topology model as part of device model, network model and network
      service model

   Appendix A documents some other IETF activities related to topology
   modeling, it does not want to prescribe how SIMAP should be modeled
   or which base models should be used, and it is added for
   illustrational purposes only.  Therefore it is not included in this
   section, but added to the Appendix.

6.  Security Considerations

   As this document covers the SIMAP concepts, requirements, and use
   cases, there is no specific security considerations other that those
   discussed in Section 4.3.

   Section 8 of [RFC8345] discusses security aspects that will be useful
   when designing the SIMAP solution.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC8341]  Bierman, A. and M. Bjorklund, "Network Configuration
              Access Control Model", STD 91, RFC 8341,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8341, March 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8341>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-ivy-network-inventory-topology]
              Wu, B., Boucadair, M., Zhou, C., and Q. Wu, "A YANG
              Network Data Model for Inventory Topology Mapping", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-ivy-network-
              inventory-topology-05, 20 October 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ivy-
              network-inventory-topology-05>.

   [I-D.ietf-ivy-network-inventory-yang]
              Yu, C., Belotti, S., Bouquier, J., Peruzzini, F., and P.
              Bedard, "A Base YANG Data Model for Network Inventory",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-ivy-network-
              inventory-yang-12, 22 December 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-ivy-
              network-inventory-yang-12>.

   [I-D.ietf-nmop-network-anomaly-architecture]
              Graf, T., Du, W., Francois, P., and A. H. Feng, "A
              Framework for a Network Anomaly Detection Architecture",
              Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-nmop-network-
              anomaly-architecture-07, 18 January 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-nmop-
              network-anomaly-architecture-07>.

   [I-D.ietf-nmop-network-incident-yang]
              Hu, T., Contreras, L. M., Wu, Q., Davis, N., and C. Feng,
              "A YANG Data Model for Network Incident Management", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-nmop-network-
              incident-yang-07, 3 January 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-nmop-
              network-incident-yang-07>.

   [I-D.ietf-nmop-terminology]
              Davis, N., Farrel, A., Graf, T., Wu, Q., and C. Yu, "Some
              Key Terms for Network Fault and Problem Management", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-nmop-terminology-
              23, 18 August 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-nmop-
              terminology-23>.

   [I-D.ietf-opsawg-ntw-attachment-circuit]
              Boucadair, M., Roberts, R., de Dios, O. G., Barguil, S.,
              and B. Wu, "A Network YANG Data Model for Attachment
              Circuits", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              opsawg-ntw-attachment-circuit-16, 23 January 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-opsawg-
              ntw-attachment-circuit-16>.

   [I-D.ietf-opsawg-teas-attachment-circuit]
              Boucadair, M., Roberts, R., de Dios, O. G., Barguil, S.,
              and B. Wu, "YANG Data Models for Bearers and 'Attachment
              Circuits'-as-a-Service (ACaaS)", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-opsawg-teas-attachment-circuit-
              20, 23 January 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-opsawg-
              teas-attachment-circuit-20>.

   [I-D.ietf-teas-te-topo-and-tunnel-modeling]
              Bryskin, I., Beeram, V. P., Saad, T., and X. Liu, "TE
              Topology and Tunnel Modeling for Transport Networks", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-teas-te-topo-and-
              tunnel-modeling-06, 12 July 2020,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-teas-te-
              topo-and-tunnel-modeling-06>.

   [I-D.irtf-nmrg-network-digital-twin-arch]
              Zhou, C., Yang, H., Duan, X., Lopez, D., Pastor, A., Wu,
              Q., Boucadair, M., and C. Jacquenet, "Network Digital
              Twin: Concepts and Reference Architecture", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-irtf-nmrg-network-digital-
              twin-arch-11, 6 July 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-nmrg-
              network-digital-twin-arch-11>.

   [I-D.ogondio-nmop-isis-topology]
              de Dios, O. G., Barguil, S., Lopez, V., Ceccarelli, D.,
              and B. Claise, "A YANG Data Model for Intermediate System
              to intermediate System (IS-IS) Topology", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ogondio-nmop-isis-
              topology-01, 20 October 2025,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ogondio-nmop-
              isis-topology-01>.

   [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-ospf-topology]
              de Dios, O. G., Barguil, S., and V. Lopez, "A YANG Data
              Model for Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) Topology", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ogondio-opsawg-ospf-
              topology-01, 23 October 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ogondio-
              opsawg-ospf-topology-01>.

   [RFC3444]  Pras, A. and J. Schoenwaelder, "On the Difference between
              Information Models and Data Models", RFC 3444,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC3444, January 2003,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3444>.

   [RFC5136]  Chimento, P. and J. Ishac, "Defining Network Capacity",
              RFC 5136, DOI 10.17487/RFC5136, February 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5136>.

   [RFC7011]  Claise, B., Ed., Trammell, B., Ed., and P. Aitken,
              "Specification of the IP Flow Information Export (IPFIX)
              Protocol for the Exchange of Flow Information", STD 77,
              RFC 7011, DOI 10.17487/RFC7011, September 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7011>.

   [RFC7426]  Haleplidis, E., Ed., Pentikousis, K., Ed., Denazis, S.,
              Hadi Salim, J., Meyer, D., and O. Koufopavlou, "Software-
              Defined Networking (SDN): Layers and Architecture
              Terminology", RFC 7426, DOI 10.17487/RFC7426, January
              2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7426>.

   [RFC7854]  Scudder, J., Ed., Fernando, R., and S. Stuart, "BGP
              Monitoring Protocol (BMP)", RFC 7854,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7854, June 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7854>.

   [RFC7926]  Farrel, A., Ed., Drake, J., Bitar, N., Swallow, G.,
              Ceccarelli, D., and X. Zhang, "Problem Statement and
              Architecture for Information Exchange between
              Interconnected Traffic-Engineered Networks", BCP 206,
              RFC 7926, DOI 10.17487/RFC7926, July 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7926>.

   [RFC7950]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "The YANG 1.1 Data Modeling Language",
              RFC 7950, DOI 10.17487/RFC7950, August 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7950>.

   [RFC8199]  Bogdanovic, D., Claise, B., and C. Moberg, "YANG Module
              Classification", RFC 8199, DOI 10.17487/RFC8199, July
              2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8199>.

   [RFC8299]  Wu, Q., Ed., Litkowski, S., Tomotaki, L., and K. Ogaki,
              "YANG Data Model for L3VPN Service Delivery", RFC 8299,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8299, January 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8299>.

   [RFC8309]  Wu, Q., Liu, W., and A. Farrel, "Service Models
              Explained", RFC 8309, DOI 10.17487/RFC8309, January 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8309>.

   [RFC8345]  Clemm, A., Medved, J., Varga, R., Bahadur, N.,
              Ananthakrishnan, H., and X. Liu, "A YANG Data Model for
              Network Topologies", RFC 8345, DOI 10.17487/RFC8345, March
              2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8345>.

   [RFC8453]  Ceccarelli, D., Ed. and Y. Lee, Ed., "Framework for
              Abstraction and Control of TE Networks (ACTN)", RFC 8453,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8453, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8453>.

   [RFC8466]  Wen, B., Fioccola, G., Ed., Xie, C., and L. Jalil, "A YANG
              Data Model for Layer 2 Virtual Private Network (L2VPN)
              Service Delivery", RFC 8466, DOI 10.17487/RFC8466, October
              2018, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8466>.

   [RFC8795]  Liu, X., Bryskin, I., Beeram, V., Saad, T., Shah, H., and
              O. Gonzalez de Dios, "YANG Data Model for Traffic
              Engineering (TE) Topologies", RFC 8795,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8795, August 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8795>.

   [RFC8944]  Dong, J., Wei, X., Wu, Q., Boucadair, M., and A. Liu, "A
              YANG Data Model for Layer 2 Network Topologies", RFC 8944,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8944, November 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8944>.

   [RFC8969]  Wu, Q., Ed., Boucadair, M., Ed., Lopez, D., Xie, C., and
              L. Geng, "A Framework for Automating Service and Network
              Management with YANG", RFC 8969, DOI 10.17487/RFC8969,
              January 2021, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8969>.

   [RFC8986]  Filsfils, C., Ed., Camarillo, P., Ed., Leddy, J., Voyer,
              D., Matsushima, S., and Z. Li, "Segment Routing over IPv6
              (SRv6) Network Programming", RFC 8986,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8986, February 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8986>.

   [RFC9179]  Hopps, C., "A YANG Grouping for Geographic Locations",
              RFC 9179, DOI 10.17487/RFC9179, February 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9179>.

   [RFC9182]  Barguil, S., Gonzalez de Dios, O., Ed., Boucadair, M.,
              Ed., Munoz, L., and A. Aguado, "A YANG Network Data Model
              for Layer 3 VPNs", RFC 9182, DOI 10.17487/RFC9182,
              February 2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9182>.

   [RFC9291]  Boucadair, M., Ed., Gonzalez de Dios, O., Ed., Barguil,
              S., and L. Munoz, "A YANG Network Data Model for Layer 2
              VPNs", RFC 9291, DOI 10.17487/RFC9291, September 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9291>.

   [RFC9408]  Boucadair, M., Ed., Gonzalez de Dios, O., Barguil, S., Wu,
              Q., and V. Lopez, "A YANG Network Data Model for Service
              Attachment Points (SAPs)", RFC 9408, DOI 10.17487/RFC9408,
              June 2023, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9408>.

   [RFC9417]  Claise, B., Quilbeuf, J., Lopez, D., Voyer, D., and T.
              Arumugam, "Service Assurance for Intent-Based Networking
              Architecture", RFC 9417, DOI 10.17487/RFC9417, July 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9417>.

   [RFC9418]  Claise, B., Quilbeuf, J., Lucente, P., Fasano, P., and T.
              Arumugam, "A YANG Data Model for Service Assurance",
              RFC 9418, DOI 10.17487/RFC9418, July 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9418>.

   [RFC9522]  Farrel, A., Ed., "Overview and Principles of Internet
              Traffic Engineering", RFC 9522, DOI 10.17487/RFC9522,
              January 2024, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9522>.

Appendix A.  Related IETF Activities

      Note: The models cited in this section are provided for
      illustration purposes.  It is out of scope to recomend which
      models will be used as base to build the SIMAP.

A.1.  Network Topology

   Interestingly, we could not find any network topology definition in
   IETF RFCs (not even in [RFC8345]) or Internet-Drafts.  However, it is
   mentioned in multiple documents.  As an example, in Overview and
   Principles of Internet Traffic Engineering [RFC9522], which mentions:

   |  To conduct performance studies and to support planning of existing
   |  and future networks, a routing analysis may be performed to
   |  determine the paths the routing protocols will choose for various
   |  traffic demands, and to ascertain the utilization of network
   |  resources as traffic is routed through the network.  Routing
   |  analysis captures the selection of paths through the network, the
   |  assignment of traffic across multiple feasible routes, and the
   |  multiplexing of IP traffic over traffic trunks (if such constructs
   |  exist) and over the underlying network infrastructure.  A model of
   |  network topology is necessary to perform routing analysis.  A
   |  network topology model may be extracted from:
   |  
   |  *  Network architecture documents
   |  
   |  *  Network designs
   |  
   |  *  Information contained in router configuration files
   |  
   |  *  Routing databases such as the link state database of an
   |     interior gateway protocol (IGP)
   |  
   |  *  Routing tables
   |  
   |  *  Automated tools that discover and collate network topology
   |     information.
   |  
   |  Topology information may also be derived from servers that monitor
   |  network state, and from servers that perform provisioning
   |  functions.

   Another example is [RFC8453] that defines native topology, abstract
   topology, black topology, and grey topology, but all in the context
   of actual topology and physical topology that are not specifically
   defined.

A.2.  Topology Abstraction

   Please refer to the following documents for some background on
   topology abstractions:

   *  [RFC7926] defines topology abstraction.

   *  Section 5 of [RFC8453] describes the topology abstraction methods
      and discusses topology abstraction factors, types, and their
      context in the ACTN architecture.

   *  Section 3.13 of [RFC8795] defines abstract TE topologies.

   *  Section 4.1 of [RFC8795] defines native TE topologies.

   *  Section 4.4 of [RFC8795] describes how to deal with multiple
      abstract TE topologies provided by the same provider.

   *  Section 1.3 of [I-D.ietf-teas-te-topo-and-tunnel-modeling] gives
      some background on topology abstraction.

A.3.  Core SIMAP Components

   The following specifications are relevant to the core functions
   provided by the SIMAP:

   *  IETF network model and network topology model [RFC8345]

   *  A YANG grouping for geographic location [RFC9179]

   *  IETF modules that augment [RFC8345] for different technologies:

      -  A YANG data model for Traffic Engineering (TE) Topologies
         [RFC8795]

      -  A YANG data model for Layer 2 network topologies [RFC8944]

      -  A YANG data model for OSFP topology
         [I-D.ogondio-opsawg-ospf-topology]

      -  A YANG data model for IS-IS topology
         [I-D.ogondio-nmop-isis-topology]

A.4.  Additional SIMAP Components

   The SIMAP may need to link to the following models, some are already
   augmenting [RFC8345]:

   *  Service Attachment Point (SAP) [RFC9408], augments 'ietf-network'
      data model [RFC8345] by adding the SAP.

   *  SAIN [RFC9417] [RFC9418]

   *  Network Inventory Model [I-D.ietf-ivy-network-inventory-yang]
      focuses on physical and virtual inventory.  Logical inventory is
      currently outside of the scope.  It does not augment [RFC8345].

   *  [I-D.ietf-ivy-network-inventory-topology] correlates the network
      inventory with the general topology via RFC8345 augmentations that
      reference inventory.

   *  KPIs: delay, jitter, loss

   *  Attachment Circuits (ACs) [I-D.ietf-opsawg-ntw-attachment-circuit]
      and [I-D.ietf-opsawg-teas-attachment-circuit]

   *  Configuration: The L2SM [RFC8466], L3SM [RFC8299], L2NM [RFC9291],
      and L3NM [RFC9182]

   *  Incident Management for Network Services
      [I-D.ietf-nmop-network-incident-yang]

Acknowledgments

   Many thanks to Mohamed Boucadair and Reshad Rahman for their valuable
   contributions, reviews, and comments.  Many thanks to Adrian Farrel
   for his SIMAP suggestion and helping to agree the terminology.  Many
   thanks to Chongfeng Xie, Dan Voyer, Brad Peters, Diego Lopez, Ignacio
   Dominguez Martinez-Casanueva, Alex Huang Feng, Italo Busi, Wu Bo,
   Sherif Mostafa, Christopher Janz, Rob Evans, Danielle Ceccarelli,
   Sergio Belotti, Aihua Guo and many others for their contributions,
   suggestions and comments.

   Many thanks to Nigel Davis ndavis@ciena.com (mailto:ndavis@ciena.com)
   for the valuable discussions and his confirmation of the modelling
   requirements.

Contributors

   Ahmed Elhassany
   Swisscom
   Email: Ahmed.Elhassany@swisscom.com


Authors' Addresses

   Olga Havel
   Huawei
   Email: olga.havel@huawei.com


   Benoit Claise
   Everything OPS
   Email: benoit@everything-ops.net


   Oscar Gonzalez de Dios
   Telefonica
   Email: oscar.gonzalezdedios@telefonica.com


   Thomas Graf
   Swisscom
   Email: thomas.graf@swisscom.com
